---
layout: post
title: disavowal, fascism, and the 2020 election
date: 2020-07-06 11:10:00 -0500
...



Ironically, the 2020 US Presidential election pitches two septuagenarians whose
mental acuity is suspect at this particular moment of historical crisis-
a historical crisis marked by what I would call a social dementia.
Trump's cognitive abilities have drawn attention and speculation for the
duration of his presidency. Does he have late stage syphilis? Is he suffering
from geriatric dementia? The effects of Adderall addiction? Shortly after Trump
took office, Bandy X. Lee edited a volume of twenty-seven essays entitled *The Dangerous
Case of Donald Trump* in which mental health professional argued Trump's mental
stability posed a clear danger to U.S. national interests.

Over the course of the summer, the Trump campaign claimed that Biden is
experiencing cognitive decline that makes him unfit for the presidency. On the
one hand, Trump and his followers frequently externalize their own doubts,
fears, and desires in acts of projection. But also, the instinct to attack
Biden's mental fitness connects with larger concerns in the electorate over the
impact of cognitive decline of the Silent Generation (Biden) and the Boomers
(Trump). In caring for their parents and grandparents, younger generations
experience in the miniature a phenomenon they see at work socially.

Generational conflict has returned to public discourse with a vigor not seen
since the political explosion of the baby boomers in the 1960s. It is, maybe,
the most American of things to think in periodized terms invented by
advertisers. In fact, the saliency of generational conflict in the U.S. at this
moment would be better understood as a conflict of general tendencies of
material conditions that have some generational vector. Boomerism may appear to
be an attribute of age, but there are plenty of boomer adults across the age
gradients. In other words, what makes a Millennial a millennial is less their
birth date than it is their experience of the material conditions of economic
crisis at particular periods of their economic productivity. At the level of
psychological time, though, Millennials well imagine their experience to be
a generational attribute to which advertisers have given a name.

This is a mistake most often made by the Boomers themselves. Beneficiaries of the
vast economic expansion rooted in the U.S.'s unique postwar position, the
robust public support of Keynesian administered capitalism, and later the new
accumulation schemes of the financialization turn of the 1970s, many (white) boomers
have interpreted their temporal luck as signs of personal virtue. Such
a response to the ideologies of the American dream is not limited to the
Boomers themselves, though. The virtue of mistaken virtue is its ability to
mobilize grievance.

Trump's strongest support nationally trends old, white, evangelical, and middle
income, in other words, people convinced that their struggles are a betrayal of
their personal success. Or that their prospects for personal success have been
forsaken by the boogieman du jour. That position of victimization is
predicated on a systematic disavowal of history and material conditions. And
this disavowal, this victimization, unites fascists in the U.S. more than
age. The fascism of Trump and his movement emerged with the financial backing
of the deep pockets of the same ruling class that has produced the crisis in
capitalism to which that fascism is responding. This contradiction, though,
requires repression. 

In the 1930s, Japanese Marxist Tosaka Jun argued that the confluence of
imperialism and capitalism that produced Japanese fascism, or Japanism,
manifested culturally through a valorization of three connected forms of
restorationism-- 1. agriculturalism; 2. militarism; 3. spiritualism. These
movements were associated with popular conceptions of a prior feudalism, but
were not simply anachronisms. Rather, Japanism took associational elements of
a pre-national past and reconfigured them to provide a moral discourse of the
disavowal of Japanese modernity.

Tosaka wrote, "the important parameter of the feudalist consciousness here is
in fact the idea of the '*oneness of soldiers and farmers*.'"[^1] To this unity,
Japanism married a primitivization of consciousness in the form of
a restorationist spiritualism in service of the Emperor that "must capture the
middle class in general, or the petit bourgeois, which is experiencing extreme
turmoil in its social consciousness."[^2]

It is not hard to imagine corollaries in the American present. In the place of
disavowed historical and material conditions, Trumpism offers the triune
ideologies of heartland-ism, militarism, and evangelicalism. In place of an
anachronistic feudalism, American fascism deploys a petit bourgeois defense
that is of more recent origin, but no less nostalgic, appealing to the (white)
boomer's childhood while repressing the material conditions and limits on
capital necessary for its return.

The appeal to heartland-ism, militarism, and evangelicalism are nostalgic
antidotes to the disruption of the social dementia that acts as a refusal of
history.

[^1]: Tosaka Jun, "The
Fate of Japanism," trans. by John Person in Kawashima, et.al. *Tosaka Jun:
A Critical Reader* (Ithaca: Cornell Univ. Press, 2013): 64.

[^2]: Ibid., 66.
