# a prologue

**I originally published this on my old blog, [parezcoydigo](https://parezcoydigo.wordpress.com/2011/08/08/a-new-prologue/). 
I was reminded of it working on the question of eloquence for an article. 
What did it mean to be *eloquent* in 18th-century Quito? Above all else
it meant being capable of demonstrating, or rather of performing how
well read you were. It meant name-dropping, and preferably from Greek and 
Roman sources. That's part of what Cervantes was mocking in his narrator's
prologue to *Don Quixote*, from whence this came:**


A prologue for my
[book](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0826349234?tag=chadblackalat-20&camp=14573&creative=327641&linkCode=as1&creativeASIN=0826349234&adid=0Y6ZG7X96WF6PX8ZWKN4&),
in anticipation of its dissection in History Seminar rooms.

Idle seminarian: I don't have to swear any oaths to persuade you that I
should like this book, since it is the son of my brain, to be the most
beautiful, elegant and intelligent book imaginable. But I couldn't go
against order of nature, according to which like gives birth to like.
And to what can my barren and ill-cultivated mind give birth except the
history of a dry, shriveled child, whimsical, and full of extravagant
fancies that nobody else has ever imagined-- a child born, after all, in
the prison of graduate school, where every discomfort has its seat and
every dismal sound its habitation? Tranquility, peaceful surroundings,
the pleasures of walking amongst stacks of mildewed tomes we once
checked out viscerally, the morning cigarette at eleven after a long
dark night of excursions through archival anxieties, the serene smells
of brewing coffee --- these are the things that encourage even the most
barren muses to become fertile and bring forth a progeny to fill the
world with wonder and delight.

It can happen that a man has an ugly, charmless son, and his love
blindfolds him to prevent him from seeing the child's defects: on the
contrary, he regards them as gifts and graces, and describes them to his
friends as examples of wit and cleverness. But although I seem like this
treatise's father, I am really its stepfather, and I don't want to drift
with the current of custom, or beg you almost with tears in my eyes, as
others do, dearest seminarian, to forgive or excuse the defects that you
will certainly see, discuss, and dismiss with the peculiar vitriol of
graduate student contempt, in this my son; and you are neither his
relative nor his friend, you have your own soul in your own body, and
your own free will like anybody else, and you are sitting in your own
department's seminar room, where you are lord and master just as much as
the king is of his taxes, and you know that common saying, 'Under my
cloak a fig for the king.' All of which exempts and frees you from every
respect and obligation, and so you can say whatever you like about this
history, without fear of being attacked for a hostile judgement or
rewarded for a favorable one. Even, it could be said, with hope and
yearning for the reward of a hostile judgement and avoidance of the
humiliation of a favorable one.

I'd have liked to give it to you plain and naked, undecorated by any
prologue or the endless succession of historiographical and theoretical
musing, epigrams, and eulogies that are usually put at the beginning of
books. Because I can tell you that, although it was quite an effort to
write the book, producing the preface that you're not reading was far
worse. Many times I opened my MacBook to stare at a blank screen, and as
many times I didn't know what to say; and once when I was in this
quandary, with the computer in may lap and a short double latte on the
table, an elbow beside it and my head in my hand, wondering what I could
write to impress you, dear seminarian, a friend of mine wandered by the
corner of the coffee shop I have sequestered as my own these last
months, a lively and clever man who, seeing me thoughtful or despairing
according the to observer, asked me the reason, and I didn't keep
anything from him but said that I was thinking about the prologue that I
had to write for my tenure book, and that it had reduced me to such
state that I didn't want to write it at all, still less publish it for
the knaves of the discussion table to parry and poke.

"Because how do you expect me not be worried about the opinion of that
ancient legislator called the academic apprentice when he sees that
after all this time sleeping in the silence of oblivion, and burdened by
the years as I am, I'm coming out with a book as dry as esparto grass,
devoid of inventiveness, feeble in style, poor in ideas and lacking
erudition and instruction, a triumph of tenurability riddled with
superfluous endnotes in need of exposition, unlike other books I see
that, even though they must certainly be fictional, are so crammed with
maxims of Foucault, Marx, Bourdieu, Homi Bhabha and the whole herd of
theorists that amaze their readers, who consider the authors to be
well-read, erudite, and eloquent men? And when they quote the Holy Writ
of Deleuze and Gattari! Anyone would take them for no less than so many
aspiring Derridas and other canons ministering to the enfeebled body of
knowledge. And here they maintain such an ingenious decorum that having
depicted a dissolute lover on one line they provide on the next a little
deconstruction, a pleasure and a treat to hear or read. There won't be
any of this in my book, because I haven't anything to put in the margins
or anything worthwhile for the notes at the end. Following their
burgeoning skills as readers, my dear seminarians, I'll have to invite
them to simply skip the notes. Still less do I know what authors I have
followed in my text so as to list them at the beginning, as others do,
in alphabetical order beginning with Adorno and on to Gramsci and Lacan
and finishing with Williams and Zizek, even though one that last is a
slanderer and impostor. My book will also lack historiography at the
beginning, or at least extensive exposition of those deans of the
colonial literature from Madison and Austin and New Haven to generations
beyond." I continued, "I have decided that my tenure book will remain
buried in the stacks of the few libraries that still have the money to
purchase codices, and in the judgement file of my department's promotion
process. And though no parent longs to outlive their child, this seems a
dignified death, less heaven or the press provide someone to adorn him
with all these attributes that he lacks-- I'm no up to it, because of my
inadequacy and my scanty learning, and because I'm naturally lazy and
disinclined to go hunting for authors to say for me what I know how to
say without them. this is why I was so perplexed and distraught when you
arrived, my friend: there is justification enough for it in what I've
just told you."

When he heard this my friend slapped his forehead, burst out laughing,
and said:

"Good God, my dear fellow, you've just corrected a misconception I've
been laboring under all this time I've known you, considering you to be
sensible and judicious in everything you do. But now I can see you're as
far from being that as the heavens are from the earth. How can matters
that are so trivial and easy to remedy have the power to engross and
perplex a mind as mature as yours, accustomed as it is to demolishing
far greater difficulties? I assure you this isn't caused by any lack of
ability on your part, but by an excess of mental indolence. Do you want
to find out whether I'm telling you the truth? Well, pay attention, and
you'll see how in the twinkling of an eye I destroy all your problems
and remedy all those deficiencies that, you say, are perplexing you and
discouraging you from publishing the history of women and the law in
late colonial Quito."

"Tell me," I replied once I'd heard him out, "how do you intend to fill
the vacuum of my anxiety and turn the chaos of my confusion into
clarity?"

To which he replied:

"Your first problem, about the epigrams and eulogies written by
important theorists that you lack for the beginning of your book, can be
remedied if you take the trouble to write them yourself and christen
them and give them whatever names you like or simply use a search engine
to google up some quotes, saving even more labors. The applicability of
such epigrams matter not, and you can always adapt them to your purposes
whatever their original meaning with a simple bracketed interjection or
two; and even supposing the quotes don't really work and some pedants
and academics (are they distinguishable?) start their backbiting and
their nit-picking about whether this is relevant or not, you mustn't
care a hoot about that, because even if they do find out that you were
telling lies or proof-texting they aren't going to cut off the hand with
which you wrote them down. As for references in the text and notes to
the books and authors from whom you take the sayings and maxims and
models and theories that you include in your history, all you have to do
is to stick in a few relevant bits here and there, whatever you can look
up without too much trouble, such as when you're writing about power:

> There is no power relation without the correlative constitution of a field of knowledge, nor any knowledge that does not presuppose and constitute at the same time power relations.

And then in the margin, mention a little more Foucault or whoever it was
that said it. You can even add some agency to your subject by
universalizing its opposite:"

> Where there is power, there is resistance.

If you're talking about the triumvirate of race, class, gender, go
straight for the verbal kung fu of Butler, which you can do if you take
just a little care, in a manner that will appear incontrovertible to the
neophytes of the profession and allow you to ignore the subjects you
wish not to write about: "Race and class are rendered distinct
analytically only to produce the realization that the analysis of the
one cannot proceed without the other. A different dynamic it seems to me
is at work in the critique of new sexuality studies." Or, simply take an
aggressive stance towards all criticism and follow the Deleuzian path:

> The shame of being a man - is there any better reason to write?

and,

> Every time someone puts an objection to me, I want to say: 'OK, OK, let's go on to something else.' Objections have never contributed anything.

And with these scraps, and other similar ones, you'll be taken for a
scholar, at least; and that brings no little honor nowadays.

As for beefing up your endnotes, you can easily do it like this: if you
include a discussion of gender relations in the book, just include the
term patriarchy, which will hardly be any trouble for you, and will give
you a splendid endnote, because you will be able to say, "Exclusion from
political power is indeed a necessary but not a sufficient condition for
the particular form of patriarchal male domination, particularly in
light of the poststructuralist insight into articulation of power
throughout social and cultural forms," in the chapter where you have
written it. After that, to show that you're erudite in the legal and
cultural history, you could contrive to name a process as a thing, and
there you have another fine endnote: "By judicial form, I mean to
indicate the actual physical form used to submit petitions, document
actions, make declarations, notate transactions, and so on, as well as
the discursive form in which the documents were formed. There was a
remarkable discursive continuity across the variety of acts that have
entered the written record, encapsulated in the judicial form." In
short, all you have to do is contrive to mention these names or touch on
these stories in your own story, and leave it to me to provide the
endnotes and marginalia; I swear by al that's scholarly to fill your
margins, and use of reams and reams at the ned of your book.

Let us now consider the list of authors cited, which other books include
and your lacks. The remedy for this is simplicity itself, because all
you have to do is look for a book listing them all from A to Z, as you
say, then copy this list into your own book; and if your deception is
plain to see this won't matter in the slightest, because you hardly need
to use the authors anyway, and there could always be someone stupid
enough to believe that you have used them all in shit simple,
straightforward story of yours. Even if it serves no other purpose, you
long list will at least lend your book an instant air of authority.
Besides, people aren't going to take the trouble to check whether you
follow your authors or not, because they haven't anything to gain from
doing so.

What's more, unless I'm much mistaken, this book of yours doesn't need
any of those features you say it lacks, because from beginning to end it
is an invective against colonial histories. All that has to be done is
to make the best use of imitation in what one writes; and the more
perfect the imitation the better the writing. And since this work of
yours is only concerned to destroy the authority and influence that
certain books enjoy in the world and among the graduate-seminar reading
public, there isn't any need to go begging maxims from theorists,
counsel from historiography, fables, clauses, or miracles from the
virgin cults, but rather to attempt, using express, decorous and
well-ordered words in a straightforward way, to write sentences that are
both harmonious and witty, depicting what is in your mind to the ver
best of your ability, setting out your ideas without complicating or
obscuring them. You should also try to ensure that the melancholy woman
is moved to laughter when she reads your history, the jovial woman
laughs even more, the simpleton is not discouraged, the judicious marvel
at its inventiveness, the serious-minded do not scorn it nor the wise
fail to praise it. In short, always have as your aim the demolition of
the ill-founded fabric of these books of history, despised by so many
and praised by many more; and if this is what you achieve it will be no
mean achievement."

I listened in profound silence to what my friend said, and his words so
stamped themselves on my mind that I accepted them without any argument
and decided to use them for this prologue, in which, gentle seminarian,
you will discover my friends intelligence, my good fortune in finding
such a counsellor at a time of such need and your relief on finding that
there will be no deviousness or circumlocution in this history of the
women in late colonial Quito. I have no desire to extol the service I am
rendering you in introducing you to such a noble and honorable subject
as this; I won't even solicit your thanks or appreciation for providing
a book such as this for your dissection table. And so, may the grace of
Clio grant you health, and maybe even employment someday my dear
graduate student. Farewell.

This is, obviously, Cervantes remixed. Thanks Penguin Classics!
